JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill's on assignment in
Cleveland.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Speculation swirls
around whom Donald Trump will
pick for his
vice presidential running mate,
but as the
candidate prepares for a
different type of
convention, could party rules
threaten his
nomination?
Also ahead this Thursday:
hunger, violence,
and political unrest, how
Venezuela's financial
crisis has taken a turn into
darkness.
MAN (through translator): At
2:00 in the morning,
I was sleeping in my room. My
telephone rang
and it was my son. He said to
me, "Papa, I'm
kidnapped. I will put the
kidnapper on."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And our End of
AIDS series
takes us from the U.S. to
Rwanda, where a
successful response to the virus
is becoming
a point of pride for this once
battered country.
DR. SABIN NSANZIMANA, Rwanda
Biomedical Center:
Now it's time where we can say,
no more loss,
shouldn't lose any other life
anymore.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The political
world was alive
with talk today of Donald
Trump's running
mate.
Several news outlets reported
that he's decided
on Indiana Governor Mike Pence.
Trump's son,
Donald Jr., told NBC it's down
to three, Pence,
former Speaker Newt Gingrich and
New Jersey
Governor Chris Christie. The
Trump campaign
said only that an announcement
will come tomorrow
morning.
Meanwhile, the Democrats'
presumptive nominee,
Hillary Clinton, met with
Democratic senators
at the Capitol. She told them
she will pick
a -- quote -- "very qualified"
vice presidential
running mate. We will discuss
all of this
and more after the news summary.
Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader
Ginsburg
walked back her criticism of
Donald Trump
today. She had branded him a
faker and dangerous
for the country. In a new
statement, she said
-- quote -- "My recent remarks
were ill-advised,
and I regret making them. In the
future, I
will be more circumspect."
The U.S. secretary of homeland
security says
he's worried about potential
trouble during
protests at the upcoming party
conventions.
Jeh Johnson spoke at a House
hearing today.
JEH JOHNSON, U.S. Secretary of
Homeland Security:
I am concerned about the
prospect of demonstrations
getting out of hand. I am
concerned about
the possibility of violence. We
have within
DHS some 3,000 personnel that
will be dedicated
to the security of the
Republican National
Convention and the Democratic
National Convention
each.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Johnson said
thousands of state
and local police will also be
working the
two conventions.
Hundreds turned out today in St.
Paul, Minnesota,
for the funeral of Philando
Castile, whose
fatal shooting by a policeman
had touched
off nationwide protests. The
casket was carried
by horse-drawn carriage to the
Cathedral of
St. Paul. More than 1,500
mourners attended
the service.
In Dallas, police turned out en
masse for
the funeral of Sergeant Michael
Smith. He
was one of five officers shot to
death by
a sniper last week.
A tragedy is unfolding in
Southern France
tonight. A truck rammed into a
crowd celebrating
Bastille Day in Nice. Local
officials say
at least 30 people were killed,
including
the driver, and 100 were
injured. They're
calling it an attack.
Britain's new prime Britain's
new prime minister,
Theresa May, shook up the ruling
Cabinet today,
sacking several ministers and
naming Boris
Johnson as foreign secretary.
The outspoken
former London mayor helped lead
efforts to
quit the European Union. His
appointment drew
sharp criticism across Europe.
Johnson brushed
it aside.
BORIS JOHNSON, Former Mayor of
London: It
is inevitable there was going to
be a certain
amount of plaster coming off the
ceiling in
the chancelleries of Europe. It
wasn't the
result that they were expecting.
And clearly
they are making their views
known in a frank
and free way.
There's a massive difference
between leaving
the E.U. and our relations with
Europe, which,
if anything, I think, are going
to be intensified
and be built up at an
intergovernmental level.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Here in
Washington, the State
Department said the United
States expects
to work well with the new
British ministers.
Secretary of State John Kerry
traveled to
Moscow today, reportedly calling
for joint
U.S.-Russian action against
Islamic State
forces in Syria. Ahead of
Kerry's arrival,
The Washington Post said that he
will propose
joint bombing operations and
other efforts,
and ask Russia to restrain
Syria's military.
Until now, the Obama
administration had rejected
such cooperation.
Meanwhile, Syrian President
Bashar al-Assad
has denied that his forces
targeted American
journalist Marie Colvin. She
died in an artillery
attack while reporting in Syria
in 2012, and
her family is charging in a
lawsuit that the
regime wanted her silenced.
But Assad tells the "NBC Nightly
News" that
Colvin was to blame for her own
death.
BASHAR AL-ASSAD, President of
Syria: She worked
with the terrorists. And because
she came
illegally, she's being
responsible of everything
that befall on her. Nobody knows
if she was
killed by a missile or which
missile and where
did the missile come from or
how. Nobody has
any evidence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Assad typically
uses the term
terrorists to describe all of
the groups fighting
his forces.
And back in this country, Wall
Street resumed
its rally. The Dow Jones
industrial average
gained 134 points to close at
18506. The Nasdaq
rose 28 points, and the S&P 500
added 11.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
speculation
grows around Donald Trump's V.P.
pick; a country
in crisis, inside Venezuela's
economic collapse;
a rise in employment contracts
that restrict
workers' freedom; and much more.
We start with a swirl of
speculation around
Donald Trump's V.P. pick, as the
Republican
Party readies for an
unconventional convention.
Gwen is in Cleveland tonight at
the PBS station
there, WVIZ ideastream.
Hello, Gwen.
So, how does all this rollout of
a vice presidential
pick, how does it compare with
others you
have covered?
GWEN IFILL: I would say the last
24 hours
is crazier than any other I have
ever covered,
but not entirely the entire
process.
We're still waiting for the
final word on
who the nominee is going to be.
But think
back with me, Judy, because you
have covered
these as well. In 1988, that was
the one big
surprise. Remember when Dan
Quayle showed
up literally at the convention
on a riverboat
and George Bush had anointed him
for the first
time?
No one had ever really heard of
him. No one
had thought of him, once again
from Indiana,
a senator from Indiana. And then
I remember,
in 1992, being in Little Rock
and hearing
that Al Gore was going to be
Bill Clinton's
nominee. And part of the
surprise of that,
of course, was there were two
Southerners.
That wasn't supposed to happen.
That wasn't
the conventional wisdom.
But I think the last true
surprise, and it
didn't happen on the day of the
announcement,
but it happened maybe a day or
two before,
was when Dick Cheney, who was in
charge of
the search process, actually
announced that
he was going to be -- he didn't
announce it,
but it became clear he was going
to be the
vice presidential nominee that
year.
So, when you think about it --
for H.W. Bush
-- when you think about it now
-- I mean,
for George W. Bush -- when you
think about
it now, you realize this is
crazy and this
is unusual and everything about
this campaign
has been unusual, but the vice
presidential
pick process always is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the bottom
line is reporters
have to be very careful at a
moment like this.
GWEN IFILL: Very, very careful.
We woke up this morning and we
heard that
Mike Pence was leading the
possibilities.
And then that grew for a while,
and then the
Trump people sprayed some water
on it. And
there are a million different
theories I have
seen today. I personally,
especially given
the way this campaign has been,
want to watch
Donald Trump walk out himself
and say the
words.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think we all
do. All right,
Gwen, who will be doing
"Washington Week"
from there tomorrow night,
thanks.
GWEN IFILL: Yes, we will have a
special hour-long
show. Looking forward to it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: From possible
running mates
to party rules, there is a lot
to unpack.
I'm joined now by Lisa
Desjardins in Cleveland,
NPR political editor Domenico
Montanaro, and
"NewsHour" regular presidential
historian
Michael Beschloss.
And we welcome all three of you
back to the
program.
Lisa, I'm going to come to you
in just a moment
to talk about the rules
committee, but first
I want to turn to Domenico on
the latest on
the vice presidential pick by
Donald Trump.
It's been up and down all day,
as Gwen said.
What are you learning?
DOMENICO MONTANARO, Political
Editor, NPR:
Yes.
As Gwen is talking about, we all
want to see
it come out of Donald Trump's
mouth, because
if there's anything we know,
that this campaign
wants to surprise us. Donald
Trump had said
that he wants to surprise us. We
know that,
by 11:00 a.m. Tomorrow, we're
supposed the
to hear in New York. All the
signs are pointing
to Mike Pence. The biggest
signal is that
he was left off the speakers
list at the Republican
National Convention.
And what is important about that
is because
Chris Christie and Newt
Gingrich, who are
the other two finalists, were on
that speakers
list, but, of course, all of us
sit there
and say, is that head fake, is
that real?
Everybody is starting to look
toward Pence.
We will see if it's real.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael
Beschloss, you have
written about so many of these
-- of course,
you have written about
presidents and their
choice of vice presidents. What
does this
tell us about the nominee, the
candidate?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS, Presidential
Historian:
I think the first thing it's
going to tell
us, as we have always been
asking this question,
after this convention, is this
going to be
sort of a change in Donald
Trump's persona,
in which he becomes more of a
traditional
candidate or is he going to
remain himself?
And I think if it's Mike Pence,
probably the
answer is that this is a sop to
those who
are saying you should choose a
vice president
in a more traditional way. From
everybody
we hear, if he chose who to
spend an evening
with of the three finalists, the
three presumed
finalists, Gingrich and Christie
and Pence,
probably wouldn't be Pence, but
this is someone
who probably has the least risk
for this ticket,
the least unpredictable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly
back to you,
Domenico.
What would -- given what we have
watched unfold
from Donald Trump during this
campaign, what
would Mike Pence bring?
DOMENICO MONTANARO: Well, you're
a couple
of days away from the Republican
Convention
starting, and he needs to unify
that party.
You know, Lisa is out there
covering the rules
committee and that got kind of
messy today.
And he needs to be able to shore
up the conservative
base. I think Michael is exactly
right. If
you were to choose to have
dinner with somebody,
it probably wouldn't be Pence,
an Indiana
governor, somebody he doesn't
know very well.
He likes Chris Christie. He
likes -- seems
to like Newt Gingrich very well.
They seem
to echo his personality. But the
safe pick
is a pick like Pence, in the
sense that the
most important thing in a vice
presidential
announcement is do no harm in a
vice presidential
pick, because we have seen
people create all
kinds of problems for the top of
the ticket.
But most people vote for the top
of the ticket.
They don't vote for the vice
president. The
last time that you could really
tangibly point
to a vice president actually
bringing some
geography on is probably LBJ
being picked
by JFK back in 1960.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael, just
quickly to you.
How much does the pick matter,
traditionally?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Well, it
doesn't matter
usually. Domenico is absolutely
right.
If you had to just count
electoral votes,
you have to go all the way back
to LBJ in
1960 and say, he brought Texas,
a couple of
Deep South states Kennedy
wouldn't otherwise
have won.
But, 1992, Bill Clinton decided
to choose
Al Gore, against a lot of
advice, Tennessee,
another Southerner, another
moderate, also
young.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: He felt that
that would
double a lot of messages that he
wanted to
send.
So that, I think you can say,
helped that
ticket to get elected, but hard
to quantify
it in terms of numbers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins,
you are there
in Cleveland. You have been
watching the goings-on
at the convention. The Rules
Committee has
been meeting. This, I guess, is
another way
of learning something about the
nominee, isn't
it?
LISA DESJARDINS: Oh, Judy, it's
fascinating.
These are actual decisions being
made that
will affect the party for years
to come. And
today what I saw in person was
the crash of
the many tectonic plates of this
party today.
We saw the rules committee have
to stop for
four hours before they even got
started, had
to go behind closed doors,
supposedly for
a printer error, but it was
really about problems
between conservatives, Ted
Cruz's camp, also
the anti-Trump camp that's
hoping to use the
rules process to derail Donald
Trump next
week.
Add to that to the mix the RNC.
Their officials
were another side, and the Trump
campaign.
So you have these four sides
coming together,
each trying to protect their own
territory.
And, Judy, I just came from
there. Those negotiations
completely collapsed. And I
think the takeaway
here today is that the
grassroots movement
of the Republican Party, the
ones that do
not trust Washington and do not
trust the
RNC, they seem to have had some
losses today.
One vote that just happened, a
big one, there
was a move to try and ban
lobbyists from being
part of the RNC. That failed.
That was a major
test vote. That shows the RNC's
strength.
Donald Trump, his campaign sort
of staying
arm's length from that, but
they're hoping
that that bodes well for them as
they try
to go to a convention and they
want the least
rebellion possible.
However, Judy, there is enough
people here
who want to derail Donald Trump
that I think
we're still going to hear their
voices on
the floor next week, but it's
just not clear
how much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Domenico,
listening to
you -- and I want to come back
to Lisa -- why
does it matter to Donald Trump
what comes
out of the rules committee right
now?
DOMENICO MONTANARO: Well, I
don't think it
matters so much what necessarily
comes out
of the rules committee, you
know, in a procedural
way, but what they really want
to do and need
to do here is to pacify some of
the anti-Trump
rebellion that could take place.
The last thing that Reince
Priebus, the chairman
of the Republican Party, or
anybody else on
the Trump campaign wants right
now is any
show of disunity on the floor of
the convention.
That's what they're trying to
avoid.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Michael,
looking at this
through the lens of history,
relationships
between the party and the
nominee have varied
from election to election. How
much does it
matter to Donald Trump that he
has the RNC
and the grassroots of the party,
which in
this case are two different
things, with him?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Totally
matters.
We were talking about this rules
committee.
That excuse that there was a
printer error
that stalled the meeting, it
sounded like
something out of the old Soviet
Union, the
kind of excuse that used to be
given.
But the point is that if there's
even the
remotest danger that these
pledged delegates
will become liberated, there is
a history
of that. In 1980, Ted Kennedy
came to New
York with Jimmy Carter, who was
president,
didn't have enough delegates.
So, he tried
to get a rule passed that all
pledges were
-- could be broken, and in that
case he might
be able to beat Jimmy Carter,
who was not
running well in the polls.
So they don't want anything, the
Trump people,
to happen that's spontaneous.
But the final
point is that Donald Trump will
be totally
affected by the image that
Americans take
away of this convention at the
end of next
week. If it's a positive image,
it's going
to help a lot.
If it looks as if it's
disorganized, people
will blame him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa, on another
front, the
Trump campaign -- there has been
a lot of,
I guess, consternation, you
might say, among
Republicans about why it's taken
so long for
us to learn who's speaking at
the convention.
The Trump campaign did put out a
partial list
today. What did we learn from
that?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
I think we got a lot from it. I
think there
will still be more speakers
ahead, but, Judy,
this wasn't the list that Donald
Trump sort
of told us to expect. This
wasn't celebrities
and sports figures. By and
large, these were
actual -- mostly, the biggest
group were lawmakers,
current lawmakers, including
House Speaker
Paul Ryan and Senate Majority
Leader Mitch
McConnell.
We knew that those names would
be on there,
but also some important
senators, like Shelley
Moore Capito of swing state West
Virginia,
Florida's Governor Rick Scott,
oh, another
swing state, I wonder why. And I
also paid
attention especially to there's
a few businessmen.
The manager of Trump's own
winery is going
to be speaking, as well as, for
example, the
owner of a casino, those kinds
of voices.
But I think we do see some
themes in here
as well. It looks like Donald
Trump is going
to open this convention talking
about security.
He said just a few days ago,
"I'm the law
and order candidate."
I think they're going to play
that up a lot.
And then, also, with these
businesses, probably
talk about jobs. I think, Judy,
all these
things kind of come together,
what we're talking
about, the vice president, the
rules. This
idea that the conservatives and
the Republican
Party are very hungry for some
red meat, whether
it's in the direction of the
party or in their
candidate or in the vice
presidential candidate.
Mike Pence, if he's the nominee,
fills that
goal. But he also, some
Democrats are telling
me today, gives them something,
because he
is very staunch abortion. He is
against gay
rights.
So, while he appeals to many
Republicans,
he sort of creates this bigger
divide perhaps
as we get into November. And I
think Donald
Trump seems to be doing a lot of
things here
in all of these ways for
conservative at this
convention.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So many questions
answered
today, but other questions
certainly still
out there.
Lisa Desjardins, Domenico
Montanaro, Michael
Beschloss, thank you, all three.
And we look
forward to spending much more
time with you
next week.
LISA DESJARDINS: Absolutely.
DOMENICO MONTANARO: Thank you.
Look forward
to it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to Venezuela,
where what's
been an economic crisis is
leading to social
and political upheaval, in a
country once
flush with oil money.
In partnership with the Pulitzer
Center on
Crisis Reporting, videographer
Bruno Federico
and special correspondent Nadja
Drost brings
us this report from Caracas.
NADJA DROST: Dr. Dili Gonzalez
walks into
what is left of her hospital in
Caracas. The
28-year-old physician is one of
the few doctors
left here, as Venezuela falls
deeper into
collapse, its health care system
in shambles.
We aren't supposed to be here.
We film with
a hidden camera. The ceilings
leak, vital
equipment broken, with no spare
parts, patients
in deep need with few doctors
attending.
DR. DILI GONZALEZ, Venezuela
(through translator):
These gloves aren't sterile. You
can't operate
with them. There's nothing here.
NADJA DROST: Heat flows into the
morgue. Water
shortages have made the bathing
areas putrid.
This hospital is falling apart.
DR. DILI GONZALEZ (through
translator): I
would say we have a humanitarian
crisis. There
are no medications. You can't
get antibiotics
There were eight operating
rooms. Now three
or four function, with
difficulty. One thing
gets fixed, another breaks.
We're in bad shape.
NADJA DROST: Gonzalez says
doctors have to
send patients out to scrounge
for everything
from ibuprofen to chemotherapy
agents. The
doctors have to improvise with
what little
they have.
DR. DILI GONZALEZ (through
translator): We're
responding to medical situations
as though
we are in a war. This is not
Syria. We are
in Venezuela.
NADJA DROST: This is Venezuela
now.
DR. DILI GONZALEZ (through
translator): We
used to be the middle class. Now
we're lower
class. Everyone is lower class,
because no
one has the economic capacity to
go to the
supermarket and buy everything
they need,
pay the rent, or pay for the
condominium,
pay utilities, with what they
earn.
NADJA DROST: Gonzalez and her
husband, also
a doctor, share a small
one-bedroom apartment,
and can't make ends meet with
their monthly
salary.
DR. DILI GONZALEZ (through
translator): I
earn 30,000 bolivares a month,
which are about
$30. For the apartment, we pay
90,000 bolivares
in monthly rent.
NADJA DROST: Even so, they are
some of the
lucky ones; 10:00 a.m. on a
weekday morning,
hundreds wait to buy food, in
shopping lines
that have become a symbol of
Venezuela's economic
crisis.
We're here in a middle-class
neighborhood,
but most of the people in this
line come from
poor neighborhoods from all
across the city,
because they can't find food at
subsidized
prices in their neighborhoods.
So they have
come here to this supermarket,
lining up throughout
the night, in the hopes that
when they can
finally enter, they might come
out with a
bag of rice and a carton of
milk.
Over a decade ago, the
government of former
President Hugo Chavez introduced
price controls
on certain basic goods, to make
them more
accessible to the poor, offering
them at almost
token prices. Now, with so
little to go around,
goods are rationed.
After having been in line since
midnight,
Sandra Romero Maya leaves the
supermarket.
SANDRA ROMERO MAYA, Venezuela
(through translator):
I want to eat a steak, because I
can't anymore.
What do I have for food? What
you see here,
for 15 days, a week? Do you
think that eight
people can get by on this?
NADJA DROST: Venezuela hardly
produces anything
besides oil, importing almost
all goods thanks
to revenue from petroleum sales.
But the deep
drop in oil prices, along with
what critics
say is government mismanagement,
have helped
drive triple-digit inflation,
the highest
in the world, and has reduced
the ability
to import goods.
Products from car parts to corn
flour are
difficult to get. The scarcity
has created
a huge black market. In the
Petare neighborhood,
contraband vendors called
bachaqueros display
their wares, goods purchased at
regulated
prices, and resold for much
more. These vendors
are illegal, and we're advised
to use a hidden
camera to avoid getting
attacked.
But the black market contributes
to the scarcity
of regulated goods.
ANDRY VELOZ, Venezuela (through
translator):
I leave at 4:00 or 5:00 in the
morning to
go line up, and I return at 5:00
in the evening
night without anything.
NADJA DROST: Andry Veloz, a
frustrated mother,
says it's a rare day she returns
with anything
from the shopping line to the
shantytown where
she lives with her husband and
three children.
Sometimes, they eat just once a
day.
She and her husband blame the
shortage of
subsidized goods on the black
market bachaqueros.
LEO GUERRERO, Venezuela (through
translator):
These people, who like to rise
at dawn to
be able to buy everything and
resell it. All
of it expensive.
NADJA DROST: Butter costs 500
bolivares, and
they sell it for 2,000. That's
about $2 on
the black market, or three days'
work at minimum
wage. Soaring prices and scarce
supply has
led to looting of stores. Trucks
are often
attacked. Venezuelans are at the
edge, and
many increasingly blame the
government for
the crisis they are living.
President Nicolas Maduro,
Chavez's chosen
successor, says it's an economic
war waged
by foreigners and businessmen
hoarding supplies
to drive up prices and
destabilize the government.
Tania Diaz is a member of
Congress in Maduro's
party.
TANIA DIAZ, Venezuela Congress
Member (through
translator): They have managed
to create a
huge distribution mafia. And
they block consumers'
access to products, and increase
prices along
the way. This is simply a war
economy.
NADJA DROST: Many of the
government's supporters
are the poor, who have benefited
most from
the social programs rolled out
under Chavez's
administration.
Three years after his death,
Chavez's legacy
lives on for many of his
supporters, called
Chavistas, his face adorning
billboards and
murals throughout Caracas.
Chavistas feel
their revolution has been
unfairly covered
by the international press.
And we have to overcome their
wariness before
they bring us to a Chavista
collective, trying
to hold out the crisis by
growing their own
food. Tucked under a metro line,
this is one
of several community gardens the
government
is supporting to help alleviate
food shortages.
For Jose Pacheco, the garden's
coordinator,
the government has made
mistakes, but that
doesn't deter him from believing
in Chavismo,
Chavez's brand of socialism.
JOSE PACHECO, Venezuela (through
translator):
I will tell you something. No
revolution in
history has been easy. We're in
a tough spot.
But we're not going to go over
to the right
because of that. They don't
guarantee us anything.
NADJA DROST: Margarita Lopez
Maya is a political
analyst.
MARGARITA LOPEZ MAYA, Political
Analyst: What
is happening? Chavismo is being
reduced to
its core, to its hardest core,
and there is
a portion, a significant portion
of Venezuelans
that are disenchanted by
Chavismo at this
moment, but still haven't done
the steps to
go to the opposition.
NADJA DROST: But more and more
Venezuelans
are turning against the
government, lining
up last month to add their names
to a petition,
led by the opposition, for a
referendum to
oust Maduro. Government
supporters call it
a coup attempt.
MAN (through translator): They
want to turn
our country over to the United
States.
NADJA DROST: With a political
crisis and the
economy in freefall, law and
order have broken
down. Violence racks Caracas,
now the most
murderous city in the world. As
sun sets,
much of the city goes quiet.
Going out could
mean becoming the latest victim
of robbery
or kidnapping.
MAN (through translator): At
2:00 in the morning,
I was sleeping in my room. My
telephone rang
and it was my son. He said to
me, "Papa, I'm
kidnapped. I will put the
kidnapper on."
NADJA DROST: It was a
year-and-a-half ago
when the kidnappers told this
man, whose identity
we agreed to hide, that he had
until morning
to gather a ransom of $35,000
for the release
of his son, who was put in a car
with his
captors, circling Caracas
throughout the night.
Kidnapping is big business in
Caracas, and
we wanted to speak to someone
who does it.
A trusted colleague led us to a
kidnapper
who calls himself El Negro. With
the help
of 50 gang members in his
kidnapping ring,
he studies and stalks a person
for weeks if
they look like they have money
to determine
if they are worth grabbing.
"Someone like you," he says to
me.
Once a person is kidnapped,
things move quickly.
EL NEGRO, Kidnapper (through
translator):
You communicate with the family.
And if the
family doesn't comply, we have
to pressure
them. There's various ways. You
can cut a
finger and send it with a note.
Or you leave
a note at the door of their
house.
If the family doesn't comply
within 48 hours,
we look for a way to eliminate
the person
or release them.
NADJA DROST: The father we spoke
with was
dealing with different
kidnappers than El
Negro's gang, and they agreed to
release his
son for the $6,000 he had
managed to gather.
MAN (through translator): As I
was driving
down, the kidnapper told me, "If
you come
across a police checkpoint,
don't worry, because
we're the same people."
NADJA DROST: El Negro says the
police turn
a blind eye to his operations,
for a price.
EL NEGRO (through translator):
It's a business
more than anything. It's the
same authorities
from whom we buy weapons.
NADJA DROST: Kidnappings are
rarely reported,
and there are no official
statistics. But
with a recent study estimating
their number
has quintupled this year, they
show no sign
of slowing down.
MAN (through translator): In the
end, I think
the economic situation and lack
of money,
impunity, and the lack of
vigilance are the
most important factors driving
this wave of
kidnapping.
NADJA DROST: After his son was
released, he
finished his studies within the
year and,
like so many others who could,
left Venezuela.
Most of Dr. Dili Gonzalez's
friends and colleagues
have gone, too. Despite the
crime, the food
shortages, and challenges of
getting by every
day, she's determined to stay to
serve her
patients.
DR. DILI GONZALEZ (through
translator): I'm
one of those who think, no, I'm
not going
to move out of the country. I'm
going to fight
until the end, until I can't
anymore.
NADJA DROST: For the "PBS
NewsHour," reporting
with Bruno Federico, I'm Nadja
Drost in Caracas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
small African
country mounts a robust fight
against the
AIDS epidemic.
But, first: how some American
companies are
requiring workers to sign
contracts that limit
career mobility.
While they are not well-known,
companies can
use these contracts to prevent
an employee
from working for a competitor.
Lawmakers are
worried that it's gone too far
and they are
trying to weaken or even
outright ban them.
In fact, the Massachusetts State
Senate today
debated its own bill to limit
them.
But many say these agreements
are not likely
to go away.
Special correspondent Duarte
Geraldino has
the story for our series Making
Sense, which
airs Thursdays.
DUARTE GERALDINO: In a small
industrial park
in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, the
Allure lampshade
factory.
MARK VAN WETTERING, Allure
Shades: We take
pride in that fact that
everything is made
in America, the metal, the
frame, the lining,
the trimming. And our stickers
are made in
the USA too.
(LAUGHTER)
DUARTE GERALDINO: Everything is
made in the
USA.
MARK VAN WETTERING: Exactly.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Mark Van
Wettering has been
making lampshades since he was a
teenager,
opened his own business in 2007,
just before
the start of the great
recession.
MARK VAN WETTERING: I had to do
a bankruptcy,
a Chapter 13, to get my stuff in
order, and
lost my home, but I held onto
this business.
And I bet everything on myself
and on the
company, that we would succeed.
DUARTE GERALDINO: To boost his
odds, he thought
about having his employees sign
a non-compete
contract, which would have
prevented them
from quitting to go work at any
one of his
three local rivals.
MARK VAN WETTERING: I saw a
lawyer. I had
it drawn up. I couldn't find it
in me to bring
it to the table and have my
employees sign
it. If someone feels that they
have a better
opportunity somewhere else, I'm
all for it.
DUARTE GERALDINO: But nearly 40
percent of
all American workers have at
some point signed
a non-compete contract,
including one out
of every six workers earning
less than $40,000
a year, some of them much less,
like Genoveva
Ochoa, a Central American
immigrant who speaks
practically no English, and yet
knows the
phrase non-compete.
Ochoa came to the U.S. five
years ago and
almost immediately went to work
at Allure.
GENOVEVA OCHOA, Allure (through
translator):
I learned everything here.
DUARTE GERALDINO: But two years
ago, she says
her husband convinced her to
join him at nearby
Canterbury Lampshades, which
offered her 50
cents more an hour, but also
made her sign
a non-compete contract.
GENOVEVA OCHOA (through
translator): They
called me into the office and
said, here are
the papers you need to sign, and
if you don't
sign, you don't get the job.
DUARTE GERALDINO: She signed.
But she says
Canterbury failed to give her
full-time hours,
so she quit and returned to
Allure. Canterbury
has since sued both Ochoa and
Van Wettering
for violating the non-compete
agreement.
GENOVEVA OCHOA (through
translator): This
is so unfair. Forcing people to
sign these
papers, it's like cutting off
our hands, because
we can't work anywhere else.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Ochoa offered
to resign
from Allure. Van Wettering
wouldn't hear of
it. Instead, he filed a
countersuit.
For the record, Canterbury
declined our interview
request.
MARK VAN WETTERING: First of
all, we hired
her originally. We taught her
the skills that
she has. I can't believe that
there will be
a judge somewhere in the state
of Florida
who would agree with my
competitor that a
person making $9 or less...
DUARTE GERALDINO: Nine dollars
or less?
MARK VAN WETTERING: Yes,
assembling lampshades
is now subject to a non-compete
clause.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Believe it,
says his lawyer,
Jonathan Pollard.
JONATHAN POLLARD, Attorney: This
degree of
absurdity is unique to Florida.
DUARTE GERALDINO: If there's a
judge anywhere
who might enforce Canterbury's
contract, says
Pollard, that judge is probably
in Florida,
one of the more pro-business
states.
JONATHAN POLLARD: Non-compete
law is a creature
of state law. On one end of the
spectrum,
you have California, where
employee non-compete
agreements are unenforceable.
And on another
end of the spectrum, you have
Florida, where
they are highly enforceable.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Of course,
even in Florida,
most non-compete contracts are
reserved for
higher-level employees who have
access to
trade secrets.
RUSSELL BECK, Attorney: Recipes
for cookies,
profit margins, customer lists.
DUARTE GERALDINO: And as
attorney Russell
Beck, who writes an influential
blog, points
out:
RUSSELL BECK: Billions of
dollars of trade
secrets are stolen on an annual
basis, and
there needs to be some mechanism
for protecting
them.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Several
studies suggest
theft of trade secrets robs the
U.S. economy
of some $300 to $500 billion a
year. Headlines
warn of larcenous employees
looking to lift
a lot more than paper clips.
No wonder non-compete contracts
have proliferated,
popping up in some surprising
sectors of American
life.
MAN: The way they made it very
clear to us
from the beginning is that we
were volunteer
providers. We are not employees
of the company.
DUARTE GERALDINO: And yet, in
the paperwork
that you signed, you had to sign
a non-compete?
OMAR SAID, Florida: We did.
DAMARIS SAID, Florida: Can you
get the drinks,
honey?
DUARTE GERALDINO: Omar and
Damaris Said are
foster parents, licensed by
Florida to care
for special-needs children.
OMAR SAID: They have autism,
bipolar, intellectual
disability.
DAMARIS SAID: Some of them have
all three.
A lot of times, the children who
have these
behaviors are in institutions.
And the state
wants to step them down into
group homes,
but we need people that are
willing to open
up and do this type of service.
DUARTE GERALDINO: In 2012, the
Saids signed
a detailed contract with a
private company
called LifeShare to take David
and Cyrus (ph)
into their home.
LifeShare would train and
supervise the Saids,
and also give them a portion of
what the state
paid for the boys' care. The
Saids agreed
to provide a long list of
services.
OMAR SAID: This is not
baby-sitting. This
is a therapeutic setting. We are
constantly
taking data, annotating
behaviors, looking
at trends, graphing that
information. We have
therapists coming in and out. We
have doctors'
appointments.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Cyrus, now 17,
had been
in an institution.
CYRUS, Florida: Here, it's a lot
more better.
They care about you. They don't
let other
people hurt you. But other
places, they didn't
do that.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Did they hurt
you?
CYRUS: Yes, sometimes. They let
the boys hurt
me.
DUARTE GERALDINO: What did they
do?
CYRUS: Punch me, kick me. One of
them tries
to break my arm.
DAMARIS SAID: OK, and so whoever
wins, what
do we say? Good game, good job.
DUARTE GERALDINO: This level of
foster care
can be physically and
emotionally challenging.
DAMARIS SAID: Yes, I have gotten
punched in
the face. He's gotten bitten.
He's gotten
nose broken.
OMAR SAID: We don't take it
personal. This
is a challenge that they were
born with. It's
our job to help them manage it.
DUARTE GERALDINO: But according
to the contract,
the response to violent
outbursts was to dial
911, then a LifeShare hot line
and wait for
a call back.
LifeShare wouldn't comment, but
the Saids
say the company often told them
to lock themselves
in their bedroom.
OMAR SAID: What happens if he
gets into glass
or into some of the kitchenware,
or rips the
TV from the wall and injures
themselves?
DAMARIS SAID: So, we were
getting hurt. The
boys were getting hurt. And we
would call
the cops, and then the cops
would say, if
you don't know how to control
them, then these
boys do not have any business
being here in
your home.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Fearing they
would lose
Cyrus and David, the Saids
decided to terminate
the contract with LifeShare and
deal directly
with the state, which was urging
a more hands-on
approach. They say LifeShare
immediately invoked
the non-compete clause,
withholding their
monthly stipend, and demanding
they either
give up the boys, or pay $20,000
to keep them.
DAMARIS SAID: I love every
single one of them.
And we feel that these kids do
not deserve
to have a price tag.
OMAR SAID: We just wanted to
walk away and
continue doing the work that we
feel we have
been called to do. LifeShare
wouldn't have
that.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Jonathan
Pollard represents
the Saids in what has now turned
into complex
litigation.
JONATHAN POLLARD: LifeShare is
saying: We
have a non-compete agreement.
Those children
are basically our property.
DUARTE GERALDINO: How is that
possible?
JONATHAN POLLARD: There is
nothing to stop
anyone from putting together a
non-compete
agreement for anything.
DUARTE GERALDINO: In part,
that's why a national
movement against non-competes is
picking up
steam. The White House and U.S.
Treasury are
investigating, as nine states
look to restrict
their use and five want to ban
them altogether.
Non-compete contracts are
increasingly unenforceable,
but employers keep asking
workers to sign
these contracts. For example, in
California,
workers sign non-compete
contracts at a higher
rate than most Americans, and
yet in that
state, these contracts carry
almost no legal
weight.
So what then is their purpose?
JONATHAN POLLARD: Those
agreements are just
restricting competition and
employee mobility,
which means, you can pay your
folks less money
and have a better bottom line at
the end of
the day. That's what it's about.
It's greed.
RUSSELL BECK: There are
definitely companies
that use these agreements as a
retention tool.
That's not what they are
designed for, and
companies shouldn't be doing
that.
DUARTE GERALDINO: But, to be
clear, you believe
that there is a place in the
future of the
American work force for these
non-competes?
RUSSELL BECK: Absolutely. They
just can't
be abused.
DUARTE GERALDINO: That's the
struggle for
policy-makers. Non-competes can
promote innovation
and entrepreneurship, but they
also have the
potential to act like economic
nooses around
the necks of workers, and even
competing businesses.
MARK VAN WETTERING: I want to
compete, but
I want to compete on a fair
playing field.
DUARTE GERALDINO: In Fort
Lauderdale, Duarte
Geraldino for "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now our series
The End of AIDS
turns from America's epidemic to
the one in
sub-Saharan Africa. That's where
the virus
first emerged, and it remains
the hardest-hit
region, with an estimated 70
percent of all
HIV infections worldwide.
The small nation of Rwanda,
which many learned
about decades ago because of a
genocide there,
has now mounted one of the most
impressive
HIV/AIDS responses in the world.
Correspondent William Brangham
and producer
Jason Kane continue our series,
with support
from the Pulitzer Center on
Crisis Reporting.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: At this
hospital in a remote
northern area of Rwanda, a small
medical miracle
is unfolding. This district,
still in the
grips of an HIV epidemic, has
not recorded
a single case of mother-to-child
HIV transmissions
for three years.
Similar progress has been
happening throughout
Rwanda, outpacing many other
places in the
world, even many in the U.S.
We sat down with local leaders.
We sat down
with the Ministry of Health team
of supervisors.
We discussed, how can we make --
how can we
do better, just to have zero
case?
Dr. Jean Nepo Utumatwishima says
they did
it with a creative mix of
medicine, technology
and what you might call
aggressive neighborliness
DR. JEAN NEPO UTUMATWISHIMA,
Rwanda: Rwandans,
they tend to hear much to their
peers, to
the people they live with.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You listen to
who you know.
DR. JEAN NEPO UTUMATWISHIMA: You
listen to
who you know, and sometimes to
who you share
the situation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: To achieve
this success,
a fleet of influential women
were recruited
from local villages, and these
women visited
every pregnant woman in their
area to make
sure each one was educated and
tested for
HIV.
If untreated, an HIV-positive
woman will often
pass the virus to her baby at
birth, or through
breast-feeding, but HIV
treatment can stop
that. Using simple texting, the
workers transmit
results and information to the
local health
center, which then relays it to
the main hospital.
DR. JEAN NEPO UTUMATWISHIMA:
When the SMS
reaches the central server, it
goes directly
to these computers.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Dr.
Utumatwishima says working
with infected pregnant women who
are so consistently
giving birth to babies free of
the virus has
been a huge source of pride for
the nation's
health care providers.
DR. JEAN NEPO UTUMATWISHIMA: We
need a generation
of kids who will never blame us,
who will
never blame the country.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's a
remarkable success
for a country many learned about
through tragedy.
In 1994, one of the two main
ethnic groups
in Rwanda, the Hutus, turned on
their neighbor
Tutsis and slaughtered hundreds
of thousands
of them, often killing them with
machetes.
Millions more were displaced.
Government agencies, including
much of the
nation's health infrastructure,
were left
in shambles, a ripe opening for
HIV.
Jon Cohen has covered the
HIV/AIDS epidemic
for more than 25 years for
"Science" magazine,
and he traveled with us for this
series.
JON COHEN, "Science": When I was
here in 2000,
they were trying to restart an
AIDS program
that had been completely
destroyed.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So they had a
good program
prior to the genocide?
JON COHEN: They had one of the
leading programs
in sub-Saharan Africa in the
early 1990s.
And it was all destroyed.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Destroyed at
the very moment
HIV rates were spiking
throughout the region.
DR. SABIN NSANZIMANA, Rwanda
Biomedical Center:
Everything was completely down,
so it has
to be built from zero.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Dr. Sabin
Nsanzimana was
in medical school during the
rebuilding. He
says he hated going to the AIDS
wards, because
all his training felt useless,
the death so
overwhelming.
DR. SABIN NSANZIMANA: Could not
do anything
to help them. What you could do
only was to
see people suffering without any
help.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But Nsanzimana
is now leading
his nation's HIV/AIDS response,
and he says
everything has changed.
Today, health officials say 86
percent of
HIV-positive Rwandans know their
status, that
80 percent of those have started
treatment,
and 82 percent of those have now
have fully
suppressed the virus, making
them far less
likely to infect others.
Hitting 90 percent in each of
those categories
is what global health experts
say will be
a major step towards ending the
epidemic,
and Rwanda is almost there. Of
course, the
success of Rwanda's effort
relies in large
part on people actually adhering
to their
treatment plans.
Josiane Mukanyandwi is
HIV-positive, but she's
alive and well, and the virus is
undetectable
in her blood. That's what
prevented her young
son, Prince, from getting
infected when he
was born. But that diligence
isn't easy. It
involves long treks to the
clinic, time she
has to take off work. She's got
checkups and
treatment, long stretches of
waiting and counseling,,
managing her meds, all of this
even though
Mukanyandwi feels perfectly
fine.
JOSIANE MUKANYANDWI, Rwanda
(through translator):
It took one month to accept my
status. I talked
with my family, my parents, and
I decided
to come. Now I'm coming every
month, and there
is not a problem.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As Josiane
leaves, a long
line of moms follow through the
clinic. They're
all HIV-positive, their babies
all negative.
DR. SABIN NSANZIMANA: Now it's
time where
we can say, no more loss,
shouldn't lose any
other life anymore, because this
country will
be only be rebuilt by its own
people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
mother-to-child HIV
transmission rate has fallen so
sharply in
Rwanda that, when the rare
transmission does
occur...
WOMAN: She refused initially to
start on treatment.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: ... health
officials conduct
a forensic examination of each
case to see
why it happened and how to
prevent it next
time.
DR. SABIN NSANZIMANA: We still
have new infections.
We still have people dying
because of AIDS.
And we still have children who
are getting
HIV from their mothers, so we
shouldn't sleep.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Jon Cohen says
that, in
the aftermath of Rwanda's
genocide, the nation
built an even stronger HIV
response.
JON COHEN: They had a chance to
rebuild from
the bottom up and to build a
sturdy structure
in terms of a health response,
and they're
starting to see the payoff of
that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So they seized
an opportunity.
JON COHEN: Yes. I hate to be
Pollyannish about
any of this stuff. It's hard to
sustain this
sort of response they have
today, and the
place they want to go to next is
really difficult
to get to.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The last and
most difficult
steps to end the epidemic
involve finding
those who don't know they're
infected, as
well as helping those who are on
medication
stay the course.
WOMAN: When they give me pills,
I started
to refuse.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: These young
people, part
of a local support group, are
all HIV-positive.
They were infected at birth by
the virus that
has also made most of them
orphans. Most say
they didn't learn their status
until they
developed AIDS as kids, and
nearly died.
WOMAN: Like me, the first time I
know it,
I -- I want to kill myself.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Compared to
adults, adolescents
are twice as likely to skip
their meds, take
them incorrectly, or stop
treatment altogether.
This can hurt their own health,
and make them
more likely to infect others.
So, keeping
these young people consistently
on treatment
is a crucial goal for the
country.
MAN: It was a hard task for me
to take my
pills.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Why?
MAN: For the first thing, I
would go off,
play, and then forget the good
time of taking
medicine.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Eighteen-year-old Jean-Paul
-- that's not his real name --
is one of those
who needs help.
MAN: You're going to, like, need
someone to,
like, remind you. You're going
to need a parent
or a family member or a
relative.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Like all these
young people,
Jean-Paul has been paired with
another young
man from the group, Alexis
Nshimiyimana. Alexis
is older than Jean-Paul. He's
also HIV-positive,
and he's been more consistent
with his meds.
His job now is to help Jean-Paul
do the same.
The two hang out. They swap
stories. They
commiserate.
ALEXIS NSHIMIYIMANA, Rwanda: He
asks some
things. What can I do? I say,
this is your
life. It is not mine. You know?
You may take
medicine in order to live.
MAN: They're talking from
experience, so we're
open to them. He told me, this
is what you're
going to do. You're going to
change your time
that you used to take your drugs
to a time
that is not going to be an
obstacle to you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But there are
logistical
obstacles as well. His mom and
dad are both
dead. He splits his time between
his aunt's
house and an uncle's across
town. Jean-Paul
still misses pills now and then,
he said.
But he's trying.
It's a lot of difficult things
to deal with
for someone your age.
MAN: That's part of life.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Part of life
for an entire
nation as well, one that's
striving to keep
up its newfound progress against
this epidemic.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
in Kigali, Rwanda.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some remarkable
reporting.
And, tomorrow, our team reports
on an innovative
treatment program that's
happening on a remote
island in Eastern Kenya, and how
they have
figured out how to reach
fishermen there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be
of interest to you, too.
South Carolina's Tim Scott is
the only black
Republican in the United States
Senate. Yesterday,
Scott took to the Senate floor
to speak about
his experiences of being
scrutinized by law
enforcement because of the color
of his skin.
Here is an excerpt:
SEN. TIM SCOTT (R), South
Carolina: For those
who don't know, there are a few
ways to identify
a member of Congress or Senate.
Well, typically, when you have
been here for
a couple of years, the law
enforcement officers
get to know your face, and they
just identify
you by face. But, if that
doesn't happen,
and you have a badge, a your
license that
you can show them, shows you're
a senator,
or this really cool pin. I
oftentimes say
that the House pin is larger
because our egos
are bigger, so we need a smaller
pin.
So it's easy to identify a U.S.
senator by
our pin. I recall walking into
an office building
just last year after being here
for five years
on the Capitol.
And the officer looked at me
with a little
attitude and said: "The pin, I
know. You,
I don't. Show me your I.D."
I will tell you, I was thinking
to myself,
either he thinks I'm committing
a crime, impersonating
a member of Congress, or -- or
what?
Well, I will tell you that,
later that evening,
I received a phone call from his
supervisor
apologizing for the behavior.
Mr. President, that is at least
the third
phone call that I have received
from a supervisor
or the chief of police since I
have been in
the Senate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was U.S.
Senator Tim Scott
of South Carolina.
We continue the conversation
about race and
policing online, not just a
black and white
issue. Activists are calling for
greater exposure
of police shootings of Latinos.
Read more
about five more Americans shot
by police last
week whose deaths didn't garner
much media
coverage.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And now updating two major
stories.
A scene of horror has unfolded
in Southern
France tonight. Officials in
Nice report 60
killed, 100 hurt when a truck
plowed into
a crowd watching fireworks for
Bastille Day.
Amateur video captured people
running for
their lives. Witnesses and local
officials
called it an attack and said the
driver also
shot at the crowd before being
shot dead himself.
In Washington, a spokesman at
the White House
says President Obama has been
informed of
the situation.
And in the night's other big
story, it is
being widely reported that
Republican Donald
Trump has asked Indiana Governor
Mike Pence
to be his running mate, and that
Pence has
accepted. The Trump campaign
says only that
the announcement will come
tomorrow morning
in New York.
And a reminder that, next week,
I will be
joining Gwen and the rest of our
"NewsHour"
team in Cleveland for four days
of special
coverage at the Republican
National Convention.
Here's how to watch.
NARRATOR: With so much at stake,
you need
election coverage you can trust.
That's why
the "PBS NewsHour" has teamed up
with NPR
to bring you prime-time coverage
of the conventions.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
joined by
NPR's Rachel Martin for
balanced, in-depth
reporting you won't find
anywhere else.
Join us for live coverage of the
Republican
National Convention, begins
Monday, July 18,
at 8:00/7:00 Central, only on
PBS and NPR
stations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we hope you
will join us.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.